---
title: How does Windows compare with MacOS or Linux for Dev-ex now?
date: '2021-04-17'
---

import ExternalLink from '../../src/components/ExternalLink';
import InlineImages from '../../src/components/InlineImages';

import appleTerm from '../../content/assets/apple-terminal.png';
import iterm2 from '../../content/assets/iterm-2.png';
import winTerm from '../../content/assets/windows-terminal.png';
import prompts from '../../content/assets/prompts.png';

Till pretty recently, if I had to write some code, I wouldn't touch Windows with
a 6 foot pole. I've written code on MacOS or Ubuntu most of my brief-so-far
career, but I've given windows a serious shot, and, it's just not worked out for
me. The Command Prompt, or even Powershell, are just miles and miles away from
what iTerm 2 on MacOS can offer. Or similar Ubuntu terminals. And then there's
shells like [Zsh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_shell) (especially with
[oh-my-zsh](https://ohmyz.sh/)!) or [Fish](https://fishshell.com/) that are just
so amazing! Not to mention tht Ubuntu's apt, or [snap](https://snapcraft.io/),
and MacOS's [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) (also on Ubuntu now) are exceptionally
loaded package-managers. [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/) on Windows really
doesn't come close.

But, **what do I exactly mean by that?** Why is CMD or Powershell miles away?
Why do I like Z-Shell over the Windows shell? And is my mind changed with the
introduction of the
[Windows Terminal](https://www.microsoft.com/p/windows-terminal-preview/9n0dx20hk701)?

I'll try to elaborate on that, and you can reach out to me on <ExternalLink
to={'https://twitter.com/jayantbhawal'}>Twitter</ExternalLink> with questions,
complaints, or corrections.

---

## First, the terminal

I've used about half a dozen terminals so far. On MacOS, it's been Apple
Terminal, and then iTerm2 for most of my time.

The level of customization that they offer is incredible, they allow you to
export/import themes, keybindings, and they support an incredible number of
settings and tweaks to make the terminal truly your own.

iTerm2 goes far beyond the capabilities of Apple Terminal by introducing
features like Window Splitting, more powerful theming, built-in
autocompletion(!!!), open links or files from URLs in the terminal, really solid
integration with [Z Shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_shell), etc.

<InlineImages
  height={250}
  images={[
    {
      url: iterm2,
      caption: <a href='https://iterm2.com/features.html'>iTerm 2</a>,
    },
    {
      url: appleTerm,
      caption: (
        <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminal_(macOS)'>
          Apple Terminal
        </a>
      ),
    },
  ]}
/>

Command Prompt does not offer any of that! You have some absolute barebones
theming with a handful of colours, but, it's extremely barebones!

There's [Cmder](https://cmder.net/), which is honestly quite decent, but, it
tries to build on top of the existing CMD stuff, which feels very obvious when
you use it, and, it's just not as smooth an experience.

Now,
[Windows Terminal](https://www.microsoft.com/p/windows-terminal-preview/9n0dx20hk701)
is worth talking about. It's quite configurable, works really well with
[WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10), has many of
the iTerm2 features, including importable themes, window splitting, and a few
other things, supports custom fonts or ligatures well enough for me, it's a
pretty great experience. Never going back to CMD or Cmder after this. And, this
is probably the biggest difference in recent times that I've experienced
regarding being able to develop on windows.

It does help that it works really well with WSL, so my zsh profiles that I was
using on Ubuntu or MacOS, can be used as-is on Windows, and any fancy symbols
and stuff that I used will work mostly the same way. It really has gotten much
better.

<InlineImages
  height={250}
  images={[
    {
      url: winTerm,
      caption: (
        <a href='https://www.microsoft.com/p/windows-terminal-preview/9n0dx20hk701'>
          Windows Terminal
        </a>
      ),
    },
  ]}
/>

## Then, the shell

While the bash shell is quite good, the ecosystem of Z Shell is straight-up
**incredible!**. Have you seen [oh-my-zsh](https://ohmyz.sh/)? It has its own
plugin and theming system which is just so crazy! Here, take a look at some of
the [prompt themes](https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/wiki/Themes) with
oh-my-zsh that require almost zero configuration.

<InlineImages
  height={250}
  images={[
    {
      url: prompts,
      caption: 'Several oh-my-zsh themed prompts',
    },
  ]}
/>
<br />

This plugin is my favorite:
[Powerlevel10k](https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k)

Your prompt can change depending on what commands you're running, what project
directory you are in, etc.

For example: If you were in a node or npm/yarn based project directory, the
right side of the prompt may show you the current node/npm/yarn version.

There's also [Fish shell](https://fishshell.com/) that has a ton of advanced
features, a lot of them being present in Zsh too, but I've not used it in a
while, not since most of the features that I personally cared about were brought
to Zsh as well.

You can do a very limited version of any of this in CMD. Though, if you're
running Windows Terminal, a lot more is possible when you're inside WSL, but,
not so much within Windows itself. CMD inside WSL doesn't handle all the
fanciness well enough.

## Lastly, the ecosystem

Now, one of the major factors for folks working on any platform is, availability
and ease-of-install of tools or packages.

You want to be able to install apache, node, or cowsay as painlessly and quickly
as possible. You want the same ease of install even if your package happens to
be a bit more obscure, and that's only possible if your desired package is in
the package registry at all.

Here's a list of the popular package managers for each OS with their package
counts (May 2021):

- apt: 78406
- macports: 26381
- brew: 5700
- chocolatey: 8459

Here, apt is miles head. MacOS has macports and brew, for a total of ~32k
packages. Chocolatey used to be the only package manager on Windows, and with
8.5k packages, it's a bit limited, but honestly, it'll have most packages that
someone needs.

Windows is already getting a first-party package manager called
[Winget](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/windows-package-manager-preview/),
but it's new, and time will tell how well it flies. I'm hoping pretty well.

As of today, the situation with packages on windows is much better than it used
to be. There was a time when you had to install things using installers, for
software that you'd use a package manager for in other systems, it wasn't a very
uniform experience.

## Final notes

Today, I think that Windows works pretty well for software development as far as
my use-cases go, which is Web Development. WSL has been a game-changer since it
came out, and Windows terminal removes the last pain point with achieving the
Linux experience on Windows to a great extent.

Windows itself needs a little more polish to be as smooth an experience as
MacOS, but folks who haven't used MacOS won't really be bothered.
